Acts	Federal Food and Drug Act of 1906	A.K.A. Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906:::Prohibits the interstate transportation or sale of adulterated and misbranded food or drugs.
Acts	"Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938"	A.K.A. FDCA 1938:::The FDA was created under this act and required all new drug applications to be filled with them.:::Replaced the Food and Drug act of 1906.:::Provided better clarification regarding the definitions of misbranding and adulteration.:::The FDA gained authority to require adequate testing of new drugs for safety.
Acts	Narcotic Tax Act of 1914	"A.K.A. Harrison Narcotic Act:::Provided authority for IRS to collect tax on Opiates thru Tax Stamps.:::Required that any entity which produced, distributed, dispensed or sold opiates to be registered with the IRS.:::Focus was on attempting to control the heavy flow of opiates in order to protect the public from increasing addiction."
Acts	Durham-Humphrey Act of 1951	"An amendment to the FDCA 1938 requiring all products to have adequate directions for use unless they contain the federal legend ""Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing without a prescription."":::It separates drugs into two categories: legend (prescription) and non-legend (over the counter [OTC]).:::Allows verbal prescriptions over the telephone.:::Allows refills to be called in from a physician's office.:::The focus on this act was to ensure safety through qualified medical supervision."
Amendments	Kefauver-Harris Amendment of 1962	"A.K.A. Drug Efficacy Amendment:::Established ""Good Manufacturing Practices"".:::The efficacy requirement was retroactive to all drugs marketed from 1938-1962.:::Forces drug advertising to be more closely regulated and to disclose accurate information about side effects.:::Required drug manufacturers to provide proof of the effectiveness and safety of their drugs before approval was given.:::Requires all medications in the U.S. to be pure, safe, and effective."
Acts	Drug Abuse Prevention / Control Act of 1970	A.K.A. Controlled Substances Act (CSA):::Required the use of DEA Numbers.:::Completely replaced the Harrison Narcotic Act.:::The Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) was created and placed under the supervision of the Department of Justice.:::Controlled substances are placed into one of five schedules (categories) based on a potential for abuse and accepted medical use in the United States.:::Required comprehensive record keeping and transaction tracking.
Schedules	Schedule 1	No accepted medical use in the U.S. and possesses an extremely high potential for abuse.
Schedules	Schedule 2	"Has a medical use but has a high abuse potential with severe psychological or physical dependency.:::Are ordered by properly completing a DEA Form 222 (a triplicate order form).:::It must be signed by a person with legal authority (Power of Attorney or DEA registrant).:::A DEA Form 222 must be completed with a typewriter, pen, or indelible pencil.:::A DEA Form 222 is valid for only 60 days.:::Only 1 item per line, with a maximum of 10 different items per form, is allowed.:::The number of lines ordered must be totaled on the bottom of the form.:::Unused forms must be kept in a secure location in the pharmacy.:::The number of packages must be recorded on a retained copy of Form 222 and the form must be dated and signed by the pharmacist.:::The pharmacist may not use ditto marks for the date or signature.:::The invoice or packing slip in addition to the completed DEA Form 222, must be retained in a secure location of the pharmacy for a minimum of 2 years."
Schedules	Schedule 3	"Has accepted medical use and the abuse potential is less than with Schedule I and II drugs.:::May be ordered by any method (written, faxed, or verbal).:::The invoice or packing slip must be dated, signed, stamped with a red C, and retained in a secure location in the pharmacy for a minimum of 2 years."
Schedules	Schedule 4	"Abuse potential is less than with Schedule III drugs, but administration may lead to limited physical or psychological dependence.:::May be ordered by any method (written, faxed, or verbal).:::The invoice or packing slip must be dated, signed, stamped with a red C, and retained in a secure location in the pharmacy for a minimum of 2 years."
Schedules	Schedule 5	"Abuse potential is less than with Schedule IV drugs; schedule includes exempt narcotics.:::May be ordered by any method (written, faxed, or verbal).:::The invoice or packing slip must be dated, signed, stamped with a red C, and retained in a secure location in the pharmacy for a minimum of 2 years."
Process	Retention of DEA Records	"Are maintained for a minimum of 2 years, kept separately from other invoices, and kept readily retrievable.:::Readily retrievable means separated from normal business records or easily identifiable by an asterisk, a red line, or another visual identifier.:::A red C must be stamped on Schedule III, IV, and V records if they are filed with other invoices.:::They must be provided to a representative within 72 hours after request."
Process	Defective Forms	"If it is incomplete or illegible or shows signs of alteration, erasure, or change.:::They must be kept for a minimum of 2 years and be readily retrievable."
Process	Initial Inventory	Is a complete and accurate inventory of all controlled substances before the opening of the first day of business for a pharmacy.
Process	Biennial Inventory	"Is taken every 2 years (after initial inventory).:::An exact count for Schedule II and an estimated count for Schedule III, IV, and V drugs must be performed.:::Records must be kept for a minimum of 2 years."
Process	Perpetual Inventory	"Shows controlled substances received by the facility, supplied to other locations, returned to the pharmacy, and dispensed to patients.:::Shows the actual number of units of a drug at a particular moment in time."
Process	DEA Registration	Every facility that dispenses controlled substances must be registered with the DEA by submitting a DEA form 224.:::The pharmacy must renew this registration every 3 years.
Process	Return of Controlled Substances	Returned only between DEA registrants.:::The DEA Form 222 is the official document for the transfer of Schedule II medications.:::Controlled substances cannot be returned from long term care facilities because they do not have a DEA number.
Process	Destruction of Controlled Substances	"A DEA Form 41 must be submitted to the DEA indicating the name, strength, and quantities of controlled substances, the date of destruction, the method of destruction, and witnesses present for the destruction.:::A retail pharmacy may submit one DEA Form 41 each year."
Process	Theft of Controlled Substances	"The pharmacy must notify the nearest DEA diversion office, local police, and complete a DEA Form 106."
Acts	Poison Prevention Packaging Act of 1970	A.K.A. PPPA:::Enacted to reduce accidental poisoning in children.:::It requires that most OTC and legend drugs be packaged in child resistant containers.:::A child-resistant container is one that cannot be opened by 80% of children younger than 5 but can be opened by 90% of adults (there are some exceptions).:::Designed to reduce the risk of children ingesting dangerous substances.:::Required locking caps on most prescriptions.:::Nitroglycerin is exempt from the requirements of this act.
Acts	Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970	"A.K.A. OSHA:::Created the administration which ensures a safe and healthful workplace for all employees.:::The law was developed to ensure job safety and health standards for employees, maintain a reporting system for job related injuries and illness, reduce hazards in the workplace, and conduct audits to ensure compliance with the Act.:::Its impact on pharmacy is to address air contaminants, flammable and combustible liquids, eye and skin protection, and hazard communication standards."
Acts	Drug Listing Act of 1972	"Each drug is assigned a specific 11 digit number to identify it.:::This number is known as an NDC (National Drug Code) number.:::The first 5 digits identify the manufacturer, the next 4 digits identify the drug product, and the final 2 digits represent the package size and packaging."
Acts	Orphan Drug Act of 1983	"Are medications for treatment of diseases or conditions of which there are fewer than 200,000 cases in the world.:::The law provides tax incentives and exclusive licensing of products for manufacturers to develop and market the medication."
Acts	Prescription Drug Marketing Act of 1987	"Prohibits the reimportation of a drug into the U.S. by anyone except the manufacturer.:::It prohibits the sale or distribution of samples to anyone other than those licensed to prescribe them.:::It requires the following label to appear on all medications to be administered to animals: ""Caution: Federal law restricts this drug to use by or on an order of a licensed veterinarian."
Acts	Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984	Encouraged the creation of both generic and new medications by streamlining the process for generic drug approval and by extending patent licenses.
Acts	Anabolic Steroid Control Act of 1990	Resulted in harsher penalties for the abuse of anabolic steroids and their misuse by athletes.
Acts	FDA Safe Medical Devices Act of 1990	"Requires that all medical devices be tracked and records be maintained for durable medical equipment, such as infusion pumps."
Acts	Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990	A.K.A. ADA:::Prevents discrimination against potential employees who may possess a disability.:::The business must make a reasonable accommodation for the potential employee.
Acts	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act	The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) produced federal guidelines regarding the disposal of hazardous waste.:::Hazardous waste includes controlled substances.
Acts	FDA Modernization Act	"Federal drug legend (""Federal law prohibits the dispensing of this medication without a prescription"") is now represented by the abbreviation ""RX"" on the container."
Acts	Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA) of 1994	"A.K.A. DSHEA:::Herbal products are dietary supplements rather than drugs.:::The manufacturers of supplements are allowed to make claims with regard to general health promotion, but not disease claims.:::According to the act herbal products must meet the following requirements:;;;Be labeled as a dietary supplement;;;Have labeling that identifies all ingredients by name;;;Have labeling that lists the quantity of each ingredient;;;Have packaging that identifies the plant and plant part from which the ingredient is derived;;;Comply with any standards set by an official compendium;;;Meet the quality, purity, and compositional specifications"
Acts	Isotretinoin Safety and Risk Management Act of 2004	"Isotretinoin (Accutane) is a very powerful medication used to treat acne.:::The medication has been found to cause severe birth defects, induce spontaneous abortions, and produce adverse psychiatric effects including depression, psychosis, suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and suicide."
Acts	Anabolic Steroid Control Act of 2004	"Amended the Controlled Substances Act and replaced the existing definition.:::The Act increased the number of steroids to 59 substances and provided the requirements for handling, registering, security, labeling, packaging, inventory, record maintenance, prescriptions, disposal, importation, exportation, and criminal liability."
Laws	Any Willing Provider Law	Allows any pharmacy to participate in a prescription drug benefit plan as long as the pharmacy agrees to the terms and conditions of the plan.
Laws	Freedom of Choice Law	Allows a member of a prescription drug plan to select any pharmacy for his or her pharmacy benefit as long as the pharmacy agrees to the terms and conditions of the plan.
Laws	Prescription Drug Equity Law	Prohibits a prescription drug plan from requiring mail order prescription drug coverage without also providing non-mail order coverage.
Acts	"Medicare Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003"	"A.K.A. MPDIMA:::Provides for a voluntary prescription drug benefit to Medicare beneficiaries.:::Adds preventative medical benefits to senior citizens.:::Created a national competitive bidding program for durable medical equipment in 2007.:::Lowers the reimbursement rates for Medicare payments for durable medical equipment.:::Medicare Part D prescription plan allows beneficiaries to enroll in either regional or national based insurance plans.:::Allowed for a voluntary Medicare-approved discount card program, begun in 2004.:::Changed the way Medicare pays for outpatient Part B drugs."
Acts	The Combat Methamphetamine Epidemic Act of 2005	"Is a federal law that put ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine in the Controlled Substances Act category.:::Products containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine and phenylpropanolamine are subject to sales restrictions, storage requirements and record keeping.:::Enacted to regulate the OTC sales of pseudoephedrine.:::Identity and address of each purchaser to be kept for two years.:::Daily sales of regulated products not to exceed 3.6 grams.:::30 day purchase limit not to exceed 9 grams:::30 day purchase via mail order not to exceed 7.5 grams"
Acts	Medicaid Tamper Resistant Prescription Act	"As of October 1st, 2008 a prescription pad must include:;;;One or more industry recognized features designed to prevent unauthorized copying of a completed or blank prescription form;;;One or more industry recognized features designed to prevent the erasure or modification of information written on the prescription pad by the prescriber;;;One or more industry recognized features designed to prevent the use of counterfeit prescription forms"
Definitions	Adulteration	"Consisting in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or decomposed substance.:::Prepared, packed or held under unsanitary conditions.:::Prepared in containers composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance.:::Containing unsafe color additives.:::Claimed to be or represented as drugs recognized in an official compendium but differing in strength, quality, or purity of the drug."
Definitions	Misbranding	"Labeling that is false or misleading in any particular:::Packaging that does not bear a label containing the name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor or an accurate quantity of contents or is not conspicuously and clearly labeled with information required by the act:::Failure to carry a label indicating ""Warning-May be habit forming"" if the product is habit forming.:::Failure to bear the established name of the drug, and in case it carries more than two or more active ingredients, the quantities of the ingredients, the amount of alcohol and also including-whether active or not-the established name and quantity of certain other substances described in the act.:::Failure to label adequate directions for use or adequate warnings against use in certain pathological conditions.:::Products that are dangerous to health when used in the dosage or manner or duration prescribed, recommended or suggested in the labeling."
Acts	Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996	"A.K.A. HIPAA:::Improve portability and continuity of health coverage in the group and individual markets:::Combat waste, fraud, and abuse in health insurance and health care delivery:::Promote the use of medical savings accounts:::Improve access to long-term care services and coverage and simplify the administration of health insurance:::It requires that health care providers ensure that patient confidentiality be maintained:::Title I, Insurance Reform: Protects health insurance coverage for workers and families when they change or lose their jobs.:::Title II, Administrative Simplification: Established electronic transaction and Code Set Standards; it required Health Information Privacy."
Acts	Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987	A.K.A. OBRA-87:::Established extensive revisions to Medicare and Medicaid Conditions of Participation regarding long term care facilities and pharmacy.:::Resident's drug regimen must be free of unnecessary medications.:::Antipsychotic drugs are are not to be used unless the patient has a specific condition.:::Patients requiring antipsychotic medication must be documented as having been diagnosed with a condition that warrants its use.:::Patients receiving antipsychotic medication must receive gradual dose tapering.:::Behavioral modification and drug holidays are used to see if the medication may be discontinued.:::Residents are to be free of any significant medication errors.:::Routine and emergency drugs must be provided to patients.:::Long-term care facilities must have the services of a consultant pharmacist.:::Medications must be labeled according to accepted professional principles.:::Medications must be stored in locked compartments at the proper temperature according to both federal and state laws.
Acts	Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990	"A.K.A. OBRA-90:::Requires that manufacturers provide the lowest prices to any customer or Medicaid patient by rebating each state Medicaid agency the difference between its average price and the lowest price.:::It requires that an ""offer to counsel"" is made to every patient and drug utilization review is performed for every patient failure to do this may result in the loss of Medicaid funds.:::Authorizes government sponsored demonstration projects relating to the provision of pharmaceutical care.:::Patient profiles are to be maintained for all patients."
